As previously mentioned, TORs can be amended to make further changes.
The two most common types of amendments
are rebooking and cancellation amendments.
In order to do amendments, the TOR status must still be “ISSUED”.
In this example, the TOR has already been set to “USED”
and the corresponding WBS has already been charged to the project.
With the help of AIS,
the iGATOR status can be reverted back from “USED” to “ISSUED”.
The immediate financial effect of this action is a transfer
from PROJECT COSTS to COMMITMENTS.
In a sense, this effect removes the expenses charged to the Project
and this effectively replenishes the project balance.
The main reason why a TOR is reverted back to “Issued”
is to allow TOR amendments to be done by Ops personnel.
Say for example, a rebooking amendment was done on the TOR.
When a TOR is rebooked,
additional costs are incurred in the form of rebooking fees.
These rebooking fees are recognized in the form of
additional commitments since the TOR is still “Issued”.
It goes to follow that additional rebooking amendments
will continuously add more charges to commitments.
When the amended TOR will be finally set to “USED”,
all of these additional commitments will transfer
to Project Costs as additional expenses.
The project costs now include the original fare charges
plus all the rebooking amendment fees.
All of these charges will be deducted from the Project Balance.
The other amendment type, cancellations, works a bit differently.
There are mainly three types of cancellation amendments;
UNUSED FULL REFUND, UNUSED PARTIAL REFUND,
and USED PARTIAL REFUND.
UNUSED FULL REFUND amendments are instances
where the initial invoice charged to IOM was fully refunded without penalties.
In this regard, the effect of this amendment in iGATOR is that the status
is changed from ISSUED to “CANCELLED”.
In turn, the effect of this in PRISM is that the current existing commitments
from this TOR are effectively written-off and removed entirely from the Project.
In effect, a full cancellation refund amendment has a net ZERO EFFECT
on the project balance; it neither increases nor decreases the project.
Similarly UNUSED PARTIAL REFUND amendments also change
the TOR status from “ISSUED” to “CANCELLED”.
However, the main difference is that unlike FULLY REFUNDABLE amendments,
PARTIAL REFUNDS cannot remove all the commitments present in PRISM.
This remaining amount is actually the penalty fee for the cancellation.
And this amount automatically goes directly
into the Project Costs as unrecoverable expenses.
This has the overall effect of decreasing the project balance.
And for the last cancellation amendment,
let us see how USED PARTIAL REFUND affects the Project WBS.
Unlike the two previous cancellation amendments,
USED PARTIAL REFUND results in the TOR status
being updated to “USED” instead of “CANCELLED”.
An example of when this amendment type is done is for situations
where only a portion of the flight leg has been cancelled
while the rest of the flight was used up accordingly.
When the TOR is updated with this cancellation amendment,
the TOR status will automatically change to “USED”
and the commitments in PRISM will automatically
be reduced by the same amount of the cancelled portion of the flight.
However, unlike UNUSED PARTIAL REFUND amendment,
the remaining balance in PRISM is actually no longer composed of penalty fees.
These will instead be charged into the project costs as normal expenses
such as Air Transportation Costs or Staff Travel Costs.